JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Trump's
hard power budget proposal
slashes funding
to environmental protection,
agriculture and
health research, while big
increases go to
defense and border security -- a
look at his
efforts to reshape the federal
government.
Then: the high stakes
surrounding the president's
revised travel ban.
Two federal judges freeze the
new executive
order hours before it was to
take effect.
And while people with
disabilities are still
systematically sidelined for
jobs, why one
company is making an effort to
hire more.
JAMELL MITCHELL, EY Americas: As
opposed to
possibly a neurotypical person
that may try
to slide in at 9:10, the folks
that are on
the spectrum will say, hey, I
arrived at 9:02
today.
Do I need to work until 6:02?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Much more for the
military,
much less for many diplomatic
and domestic
programs, that's the upshot of
President Trump's
first budget unveiled today.
John Yang begins our coverage at
the White
House.
JOHN YANG: It runs just 53
pages, totals more
than $1.1 trillion, and embodies
stark changes
in federal spending priorities.
Budget Director Mick Mulvaney:
MICK MULVANEY, White House
Budget Director:
We had America first -- an
America first candidate.
We now have an America first
president.
And it shouldn't surprise
anybody that we
have an America first budget.
JOHN YANG: The big winners in
the White House
budget request?
The Pentagon, with a proposed 10
percent increase,
$54 billion.
The Department of Homeland
Security with a
7 percent hike, including $4
billion for the
Mexico border wall.
And the Department of Veteran
Affairs, proposed
to increase by 6 percent.
MICK MULVANEY: We're $20
trillion in debt.
We're going to spend money.
We're going to spend a lot of
money, but we're
not going to spend it on
programs that cannot
show that they actually deliver
the promises
they made to people.
JOHN YANG: The biggest losers
would include
the Environmental Protection
Agency with a
proposed 31 percent cut,
eliminating funding
for international climate change
programs
and for cleanup efforts in the
Chesapeake
Bay and Great Lakes.
The State Department would be
cut 29 percent,
mostly foreign aid and U.N.
peacekeeping.
And the Department of Health and
Human Services
is being asked to take an 18
percent cut.
While the White House wants
Congress to cut
Justice Department spending by 4
percent,
it wants more money to target
criminal organizations
and hire immigration judges, at
the expense
of civil rights programs.
In Tokyo, Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson
said the proposed cuts in his
budget are fine
with him.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: Clearly,
the level of spending that the
State Department
has been undertaking in the
past, in particular
this past year, is simply not
sustainable.
JOHN YANG: President Trump
tweeted that his
budget proposal puts America
first.
"Must make safety its number one
priority."
It represents the biggest
military buildup
since the 1980s and the most
sweeping reductions
in other spending since World
War II.
Democrats immediately condemned
the budget
request.
House Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi said it
takes from the middle class and
gives to the
rich.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
This budget is not a statement
of values of
anyone.
President Trump has shown that
he doesn't
value the future of our children
and working
families.
This budget is really a slap in
the face of
the future.
JOHN YANG: Overall, the
administration wants
to eliminate funding for 19
agencies, including
the National Endowment for the
Arts, AmeriCorps
and the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting,
a major funder for public radio
and television.
Other points of contention are
likely to be
calls to eliminate community
development block
grants, and cut billions of
dollars for teacher
training, after-school and
summer programs
and almost $100 million from the
Rural Business
and Cooperative Service.
House Armed Services Committee
Chairman Mac
Thornberry said today he wants
even more money
for the military.
House Speaker Paul Ryan said the
president's
budget is just an opening bid.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: We
will have a full hearing about
how our priorities
will be met.
But do I think we can cut
spending and get
waste out of government?
Absolutely.
JOHN YANG: Today's spending
outline doesn't
address taxes or entitlement
programs like
Social Security and Medicare.
Those are to come in another
budget document
in May.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang at the
White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A federal judge
in Maryland
became the second in as many
days to block
President Trump's revised travel
ban nationwide.
The other ruling came last night
in Hawaii.
Both judges concluded Mr.
Trump's earlier
public remarks suggest that it's
still intended
to be a Muslim ban.
The White House vowed to appeal.
We will explore the court
rulings, and what
comes next, later in the
program.
Bipartisan leaders of the Senate
Intelligence
Committee are the latest to
dismiss President
Trump's claim that he was
wiretapped by President
Obama.
They, along with House Speaker
Paul Ryan,
said today that they have seen
-- quote -- "no
indications of that."
House intelligence leaders said
much the same
thing yesterday.
But White House Press Secretary
Sean Spicer
argued today that nothing is
clear until the
Justice Department reports next
week.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
The Department of Justice asked
for an additional
week.
So, the statement clearly says
that at this
time that they don't believe
that.
They have yet to go through the
information.
The Department of Justice, as
you know, has
not supplied this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Spicer also said
the president
still stands by his claim.
The House Budget Committee
narrowly approved
the Republican health care bill
today.
Three GOP conservatives voted
no, putting
dissent in Republican ranks
clearly on display.
And, for the first time, House
Speaker Paul
Ryan acknowledged parts of the
bill may have
to be changed to shore up
support.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Clearly, the main
parts of this
bill are going to stay exactly
as they are,
but we're making those
improvements and refinements
based upon the feedback that
we're getting
from our members, and the
president of the
United States is the one who's
been mediating
this.
The president of the United
States is the
one who is bringing people
together, sitting
around a table, hashing out our
differences,
so that we can get to a
consensus document.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a FOX News
interview that
aired last night, the president
said of the
bill -- quote -- "A lot of
things aren't consistent.
But these are going to be
negotiated."
European leaders congratulated
Dutch Prime
Minister Mark Rutte today, after
his victory
over anti-Muslim lawmaker Geert
Wilders.
In a victory celebration last
night, Rutte
called it a victory for
stability and security.
MARK RUTTE, Prime Minister of
the Netherlands
(through translator): This is
also a night
when the Netherlands, after
Brexit, after
American elections, has said
stop to the wrong
kind of populism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wilders' party
finished second,
but the other Dutch parties have
said they
will not work with him or
include him in a
governing coalition.
Pirates in Somalia have released
an oil tanker
that they hijacked on Monday.
They say they were not paid any
ransom.
The release came hours after a
gunfight between
the pirates and local security
forces.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
urged North
Korea today to abandon its
nuclear and missile
programs.
Tillerson was in Japan, starting
his first
Asia trip.
At a news conference with his
Japanese counterpart,
he called for a new strategy,
but offered
no specifics.
REX TILLERSON: I think it's
important to recognize
that the diplomatic and other
efforts of the
past 20 years to bring North
Korea to a point
of denuclearization have failed.
In the face of this
ever-escalating threat,
it is clear that a different
approach is required.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today was the
first time Tillerson
had publicly fielded questions
since assuming
his post in early February.
Back in this country, the head
of USA Gymnastics,
Steve Penny, resigned amid
allegations that
he ignored sexual abuse of girls
training
for the Olympics.
The organization faces a brace
of lawsuits
charging that a former team
doctor groped
and fondled girls in training.
They say Penny and other
officials knew about
it and did nothing.
And on Wall Street, stocks ended
the day with
little change.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 15 points
to close at 20934.
The Nasdaq rose a fraction of a
point, and
the S&P 500 slipped nearly four.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Congress
weighs in on President Trump's
budget priorities;
halted again, what's next for
the White House
travel ban; Germany's ambassador
previews
tomorrow's meeting between
Chancellor Angela
Merkel and President Trump; and
much more.
tomorrow's meeting between
Chancellor Angela
Merkel and President Trump; and
much more.
Reaction from lawmakers to
President Trump's
America first budget ranged from
strong support
to tough criticism.
We have two different points of
view of the
president's budget proposal.
First up, Democratic Senator
Chris Van Hollen
of Maryland.
He's a member of the Budget and
Appropriations
Committees.
And I started by asking for his
overall reaction.
SEN.
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN (D), Maryland:
Well, this
budget tells me that Donald
Trump is already
getting very out of touch with
the American
people.
It's the kind of budget you
might expect from
somebody who jets off to
Mar-a-Lago every
other week.
And, by the way, that costs
taxpayers $3 million
each time, which is the amount
usually in
the budget for the Meals on
Wheels program
to help feed over two million
elderly.
He wipes that out of the budget.
And if you look at the overall
budget, it
really is an attack on working
people and
on educational opportunity in
the country.
It is a recipe for cleaner --
dirtier air
and contaminated water.
It's really a bad deal for the
American public.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
tweeted, Senator,
you probably know, that this is
a budget that
puts America first.
It's a budget that makes safety
the prime
consideration.
SEN.
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: Well,
actually, it makes
America last in terms of
investing in our
people, investing in our
economy, investing
in our national infrastructure,
something
that candidate Trump talked a
whole lot about,
yet they cut the infrastructure
budget here
by over 13 percent.
So, a lot of what he talked
about on the campaign
trail is actually under attack
in this budget,
including, I have to say,
important economic
development programs and
infrastructure programs
for rural America.
He does dramatically increase
Pentagon spending,
but he cuts the funding for the
State Department.
And the State Department funding
is designed
to help keep us out of wars and
to save lives
and money.
And that's what Secretary
Mattis, his own
defense secretary, has had to
say.
So, this doesn't help America.
In fact, it really erodes
American influence
around the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what
they're saying is
the Pentagon budget, the defense
spending
in this country has been cut
back so much
that the United States is
vulnerable, and
that this is a critical moment
for the United
States to restore the spending
for defense
that should have been there for
the last number
of years.
SEN.
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: Well,
actually, that's just
another alternative fact coming
out of this
administration.
We have had robust defense
spending.
I can support additional
investment in our
national security, but we just
saw a few months
ago reports out of the Pentagon
about over
$120 billion in wasteful
spending.
In fact, Donald Trump has talked
about these
huge cost overruns on Pentagon
projects.
So we'd be much better off
managing those
resources better, than simply
writing a new
check to the Pentagon, which, by
the way,
is the one federal government
agency that
has not been able to pass an
audit.
So, look, I'm all for investing
on our national
security.
We have to do it, but we also
have to recognize
our national strength includes
making sure
our kids get a good education.
And he cut the Department of
Education by
close to 15 percent.
It includes making sure we have
a healthy
population.
And he dramatically cut funding
for medical
research to help develop cures
and treatments.
So, this is really something
that's going
to hurt most of the country.
You know, the folks at the very
top who just
got a big tax cut as part of the
Trumpcare
plan aren't going to be hurt,
but everybody
else is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, again,
I'm sure you
know, but what the -- I just
heard the budget
director making this argument
today.
He was pressed on some of these
cuts, for
example, in education.
He said the administration has
looked very
closely at so many of these
domestic spending
programs, and he says where
there is no evidence
that people are actually being
helped, these
programs cannot continue.
SEN.
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: Well, we
certainly shouldn't
be asking taxpayers to invest in
programs
that don't help.
But the reality is that the
after-school programs
to try to make sure that kids
are in a productive
environment after school hours
and not out
on the streets, that actually is
an important
program.
It's been underfunded in the
United States.
There are other career and
training programs
that have shown good results,
and they're
cutting them.
The same is true with respect to
some of our
manufacturing programs.
I mean, here's a president who
says he wants
to restore American
manufacturing, and yet
he cuts the manufacturing
extension program,
which helps take innovations and
make sure
that they're available to
industry throughout
the United States.
So, this is a very short-sighted
budget.
I have to say that Donald Trump
said he was
going to be there for the
forgotten people.
In this budget, he forgets those
people.
I mean, they're not even an
afterthought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Chris Van
Hollen, a
member of the Senate Budget
Committee, we
thank you, sir.
SEN.
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for an
opposing view, we
turn now to Representative Todd
Rokita.
He's a Republican from Indiana
and he is vice
chairman of the House Budget
Committee.
Congressman Rokita, welcome to
the "NewsHour."
I think you just heard at least
part of what
Senator Van Hollen said, and
that is, in this
budget proposal, the president
is forgetting
some of the very people he said
he wanted
to be elected to help.
REP.
TODD ROKITA (R), Indiana: Yes, I
heard that.
And Chris is a friend from the
House Budget
Committee.
He was ranking member when I was
vice chairman
there last Congress.
And, you know, I heard some of
the same rhetoric.
He's a good man, but let me just
say this.
The president, with the budget
that he put
forward today, recognizing that
it's his request,
it's not the budget -- we still
have our Article
I powers under the Constitution,
and we will
use them, as congress men and
women, to reconcile
different priorities and make
sure that we're
continue to march forward for
the American
people.
But I would say that the
forgotten man that
President Trump campaigned for
should be proud
of what was done in the budget.
First of all, the one thing,
Judy, that the
federal government does
constitutionally and
does well is our national
defense.
And I will quibble with Mr. Van
Hollen if
he says that our national
defense has been
taken care of.
It only makes up about 20
percent of our budget
historically, but it took 50
percent of the
sequester cuts.
So, fair is fair.
And we're getting back to
rebalancing that.
Otherwise, Judy, this is a
traditional -- as
you would see in a economic
textbook of some
kind, traditional guns vs.
butter argument.
And for eight years or so, we
have been doling
out a lot of butter, a lot of
domestic programs.
And what Mr. Trump is suggesting
here is that
we rebalance and put a little
bit more into
our guns to make sure that we're
protected
from a military standpoint, that
we're safe,
and...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
interrupt
you there, if you don't mind.
REP.
TODD ROKITA: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because I want to
ask you about
that.
We did hear Senator Van Hollen
say, yes, it's
good to spend more on defense,
but he said
there are problems with defense
spending,
that it hasn't -- he said we
haven't even
seen a serious audit.
But I do want to ask you about
some of the
domestic cuts, education down 15
percent,
medical research, major cut, a
20-some percent
cut in the environment, 21
percent.
How -- what are these cuts?
What is going to be cut?
REP.
TODD ROKITA: Well, I have been
in a budget
hearing all day repealing and
replacing Obamacare.
So, you know, I don't have all
the details,
and I didn't write the document.
Like I said, we are going to
digest that all
in the Budget Committee.
But let me just, from an
overview perspective,
say that what I'm seeing so far
is that what
is being -- quote, unquote --
"cut" are really
duplicative programs and
programs that shouldn't
be in the agencies that they're
in.
And we see this throughout
government, 10,
20, 30 programs that pretend to
do the same
thing, but don't do it well.
And so that's what I see Mr.
Trump and Mick
Mulvaney, the OMB director,
doing here, is
really streamlining government.
And he's also making good on
other campaign
promises.
I'm the kindergarten through
12th grade education
chairman in the House,
subcommittee education
chairman.
And what we're seeing here is
Mr. Trump making
good on school choice, the idea
that the property
of parents, the tax dollars, are
actually
following the child more to a
school that
fits them, not being shackled to
a school
that doesn't work for them.
And that's an important point.
And that's not new money.
That's reprogrammed money.
So, it's money being
reprioritized.
And that's exactly, Judy, what a
budget is
about, and that's what he's
doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So the cuts in
medical research,
for example -- and I didn't
mention cuts in
agriculture.
We heard Senator Van Hollen
speak about extension
programs in agriculture.
You're comfortable with all the
cuts the administration
is proposing?
REP.
TODD ROKITA: Well, like I say, I
haven't looked
at the whole document.
I have been in an
eight-or-so-hour markup
on repealing and replacing
Obamacare, but
we will look at all that.
And what I'm saying that I'm
comfortable with
is getting rid of the
duplication, getting
rid of programs that are outside
the agency's
jurisdiction.
I'm for streamlining.
I'm for the president keeping
good on his
promises to the forgotten man
and all the
rest of us.
And that's what I'm seeing in
the budget so
far.
And then, again, also, Judy, I
will say that
we will go through the budget
process.
The budget -- the president's
budget is just
a budget request.
The real budget is going to come
through the
House Budget Committee.
It's going to come through
Chris' committee.
And it doesn't even have to be
signed by the
president.
It goes into effect without his
signature.
So, that's our Article I powers.
And you can be assured that
we're going to
look at every item, because
that's our job
and we will do it no matter who
the president
is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's a
reminder of the
way the process really works.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Representative
Todd Rokita
of Indiana, vice chairman of the
House Budget
Committee, we thank you.
REP.
TODD ROKITA: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another piece of
the Trump
agenda is getting attention
today, and that
is the president's revised
travel ban, which
hit a roadblock in the federal
courts.
Hari Sreenivasan has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The first
ruling came yesterday
in Hawaii, where a federal judge
blocked parts
of the executive order.
It would have barred refugees,
as well as
nationals from six
Muslim-majority countries,
from entering the U.S.
And, overnight, a federal judge
in Maryland
issued his own block on the
six-nation travel
ban.
For more on all this, we turn to
Devlin Barrett,
who now covers the Justice
Department and
national security issues for The
Washington
Post.
So, Devlin, this was supposed to
be the executive
order designed to skirt around
the legal challenges
that the first one had.
What were the problems?
DEVLIN BARRETT, The Washington
Post: Well,
the first one basically
foundered on due process
problems.
Basically, the federal appeals
court ruled
that the order had not been
written to give
people a fair shake in the
system essentially,
particularly people who had
visas or green
cards.
So they changed that part of it,
and they
thought they fixed that problem.
And, in a sense, they had.
But what you saw in the last two
rulings by
federal judges is that now
there's a conflict
over the real meat of the
argument, which
is, is this a Muslim ban or some
partial version
of a Muslim ban?
And what both these judges came
down on as
saying that, yes, it was
essentially a violation
of the First Amendment rule that
you can't
disfavor a particular religion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There aren't
any explicit
terms directly in the new
executive order
that say Muslim or Islam.
It seems that the Hawaii ruling
seems to take
a lot of candidate Trump's words
and the administration's
words and put them in there.
DEVLIN BARRETT: Well, right.
The Trump administration has
really struggled
in the legal process to separate
itself from
what the campaign has said, what
the president
has said, and even what some of
his top advisers
have said in defending the
order.
And those statements have all
been thrown
back at them by the judges, and
it's really,
frankly, remarkable the extent
to which the
travel ban, both versions of it,
have been
tossed at this point, or at
least suspended
at this point, based on the
words of the president
and his senior advisers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, what is
the Justice
Department going to do?
DEVLIN BARRETT: Well, every
indication is
that they are going to appeal
this.
Appeals -- notices of appeals
could come as
soon as tonight in the two new
rulings.
There is a third case where
everyone is just
sort of waiting to see how the
judge exactly
handles that.
But the expectation is there
will be more
appeals over this, more fights
over it.
And, frankly, I think, this set
of legal challenges
will really be an argument about
the basic
issue of the term Muslim ban,
and is that
an accurate description of what
this executive
order does?
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what's the
likelihood
then that this executive order
gets challenged
perhaps in other federal
districts, other
regions and has to be
reconciled?
DEVLIN BARRETT: Well, it's
growing every day.
So, for example, last night, we
saw two different
parts of the country in which
federal judges
ruled on it.
That means that, assuming the
appeals go through,
you will see appeals courts
ruling in one
part of the country and another
part of the
country, and oftentimes, just
the way the
court system works, those
rulings don't match
up identically.
And when that happens, it
increases the likelihood
that something will go to the
Supreme Court.
That all depends, of course, on
the notion
that both sides still want to
fight, but every
indication right now is that
whoever wins
or loses at the appeals court
round, the other
side will want to keep fighting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Devlin Barrett
of The Washington Post, thanks
so much.
DEVLIN BARRETT: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
when hiring people
with disabilities can boost
profit; and "Exit
West," a new book about stepping
into a foreign
world.
But first: German Chancellor
Angela Merkel
has her first meeting with
President Trump
tomorrow at the White House.
Mrs. Merkel is seeking
reelection later this
year.
Tops on the agenda for the two
leaders: the
NATO response to a resurgent
Russia and the
stability of the European Union
after Brexit.
I sat down with Germany's
ambassador to the
U.S., Peter Wittig, and I asked
him about
the importance of this
high-stakes meeting.
PETER WITTIG, German Ambassador
to the United
States: Well, it is an important
visit for
her.
And it's her first personal
encounter with
a new president.
They have spoken on the phone a
couple of
times.
But personal relationships are
important.
And for us, Judy, the U.S. has
been almost
the most important international
and foreign
policy partner over decades.
The U.S. has helped us to build
a thriving
democracy after the Second World
War.
It has helped us to unify
Germany.
So, that's a very strong
tradition, a strong
basis on which the chancellor
will build on
and establish constructive and
forward-looking
relations with this new
president in the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well -- excuse
me.
We know NATO is a subject that
has come up
repeatedly during Mr. Trump's
campaign for
president.
He's been critical of NATO.
He's said that the U.S. pays far
more into
NATO than it should.
He's leaned on other NATO
members to pay more.
How much more is the chancellor
willing to
say Germany will pay, and by
when?
PETER WITTIG: NATO is the
bedrock of our common
security.
It was kind of reinvigorated
after Russian
invaded Ukraine and fueled the
conflict in
Eastern Ukraine.
And it is on a new mission
against a newly
assertive Russia and facing
challenges in
the south of the NATO territory,
in the Middle
East, for instance.
But there is this discussion on
fairer burden-sharing.
We're ready for this discussion.
It's an important discussion.
Germany is committed to do more
for the defense,
to increase our defense spending
incrementally.
Last year, for instance, we
raised our defense
budget by 9 percent.
And we want to go forward on
this path in
an incremental way.
Yes, Europe, and also Germany
have to be more
active in defense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned a
more aggressive
Russia.
We know President Trump has
spoken about the
suggestion that he would take a
more conciliatory
approach to Russia.
If that's what this president
does, what will
Chancellor Merkel's response be?
PETER WITTIG: She has a lot of
experience
in dealing with Russia.
She has spoken so many times
with President
Putin over the last years.
I think we are pursuing a
double-track approach,
strong dialogue, keeping the
channels of communication
open, but, at the same time,
being very resolute
about our defense, keeping in
mind our security
interests, especially in the
eastern part
of Europe and beyond.
So, I think we would welcome a
new chapter
of the American and Russian
leader in their
relationships, but on the basis
of a very
clear idea where our strategic
interests and
our security interests are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You expect that
to come up?
PETER WITTIG: I could assume
that they will
be talking about Russia and the
Ukraine conflict,
about many other things, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We spoke about
NATO.
The president has also been
critical of the
European Union.
He was one of the first to argue
that Great
Britain should leave the E.U.,
so-called Brexit.
What is Chancellor Merkel's plan
to change
his mind on the E.U.?
PETER WITTIG: Europe is our
home.
It's our neighborhood.
We are strong supporters of a
strong and resilient
European Union.
We deplore Brexit.
We respect the vote of the
people.
We want to have close relations
with the U.K.
even after they left the
European Union.
But we will do everything to
keep the European
Union as a strong and resilient
economic and
political union.
And let me add this.
I think it is also in the
strategic interests
of the United States to have a
strong and
resilient Europe, European
Union, in the face
of the challenges from the east
and from the
south of our continent in
Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And one can
presume those are
arguments the chancellor is
going to make
to the president?
PETER WITTIG: I assume so.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, I have
to ask you
about some of the comments
President Trump
made about the chancellor
herself last year
with regard to her refugee
policy.
He called it, among other
things, "a sad shame
and a disgrace."
He went so far to say last year
-- and I'm
quoting -- he said: "The German
people are
going to end up overthrowing
this woman.
I don't know what the hell she
is thinking,"
he wrote.
Does she believe she has
President Trump's
respect?
PETER WITTIG: You know, the
situation two
years ago, when the refugee
crisis emerged,
was totally extraordinary.
It was the biggest, largest
movement of people
since the Second World War.
And it was an extraordinary
humanitarian crisis
at our borders.
Now the situation is different.
The numbers are dramatically
down.
The refugees that came in are
properly registered
and vetted.
So, we have gone back to an
orderly and regular
process.
So, the situation has changed
since that time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
the comments
that the president made about
her and her
policy?
Can she just -- does she think
he has his
respect?
PETER WITTIG: The chancellor, I
think, is
interested to build a strong,
constructive,
forward-looking relationship
with President
Trump.
And she has said many times she
will not go
back to the campaign, but will
want to engage
with him in a constructive
manner.
And I think that's what we want
to see tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will be
watching tomorrow's
visit.
Germany's Ambassador to the
United States
Peter Wittig, thank you very
much.
PETER WITTIG: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We often hear
about and cover
the struggles that many
Americans face when
they try to land a good job.
If you have a disability, the
challenge to
getting hired or even getting a
response to
an inquiry, much less a
face-to-face interview,
is significantly harder.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
explores why that's still
happening.
It's part of his weekly series,
Making Sense.
AMI PROFETA, Job Seeker (through
computer):
Good evening.
My name is Ami Profeta.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ami Profeta has
cerebral palsy.
He's been looking for work for
over a year.
AMI PROFETA (through computer):
People have
hung up the phone.
They don't respond to my
e-mails.
PAUL SOLMAN: Profeta's job hunt
may be more
challenging than most.
The unemployment rate for those
with a disability
is more than double the rate for
those without.
We interviewed economist Douglas
Kruse, himself
a paraplegic, via Skype.
DOUGLAS KRUSE, Rutgers
University: It's not
just a matter of people with
disabilities,
you know, staying at home and
collecting disability
income.
It's a matter of people who want
to work are
not as easily able to find work.
PAUL SOLMAN: In a 2015 study,
Kruse's research
team submitted 6,000 fake online
job applications
for accounting positions.
One-third said the applicant had
a spinal
cord injury, another third
Asperger's syndrome.
And one-third didn't mention a
disability
at all.
The results?
DOUGLAS KRUSE: People with
disabilities were
26 percent less likely to get
expressions
of employer interest.
PAUL SOLMAN: What's going on, do
you suppose?
DOUGLAS KRUSE: There's a lot of
discomfort
with people with disabilities.
I think, apart from that,
there's a lot of
uncertainty: Oh, geez, someone
with a spinal
cord injury, I'm not sure
they're going to
fit in here.
MASON AMERI, Rutgers University:
They refer
to it as fear of the unknown.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mason Ameri
co-authored the study.
MASON AMERI: How do I know if
this person
can do the job?
How do I know the cost?
So, all of these unknowns
ultimately compel
an employer to express no hiring
intent.
PAUL SOLMAN: Even though the
Americans With
Disabilities Act bars such
discrimination
for firms with more than 15
employees.
Nicole Ellis returned to the job
market after
the bank she worked at went
bust.
But she decided to leave off her
resume the
fact that she is legally blind
due to ocular
albinism.
NICOLE ELLIS, Liberty Resources:
I didn't
think that I would be able to
get my foot
in the door.
PAUL SOLMAN: It still took
three-and-a-half
years to land a job here at
Liberty Resources,
a Philadelphia nonprofit which
promotes independent
living for the disabled.
NICOLE ELLIS: I would get the
calls back.
I would go on the interviews.
And once you start discussing --
because I
have to let them know that I'm
going to need
these accommodations, like
software that enlarges
fonts or enhances speech
recognition.
So, once you start talking about
those things,
it kind of becomes like dead
silence, almost.
And they...
PAUL SOLMAN: Really?
You can feel it?
NICOLE ELLIS: You can feel it.
And then they will give you some
other scenarios
as far as, well, what about,
let's say, if
it snows?
Are you going to be able to get
into work?
PAUL SOLMAN: But you can
understand, or can
you not understand why an
employer would be
concerned about all those sorts
of things?
NICOLE ELLIS: I do understand,
but, on the
other hand, I have worked around
people who
do not have disabilities who do
not come to
work and who do not work.
(LAUGHTER)
NICOLE ELLIS: So, I mean, to me,
I understand
the doubt and the questions, but
you are discriminating
just based on the what-ifs of
someone's disability.
PAUL SOLMAN: Liam Dougherty has
a master's
in public administration from
the University
of Pennsylvania, and ataxia, a
condition marked
by a lack of muscle
coordination.
LIAM DOUGHERTY, Liberty
Resources: The way
that disability affects --
affects employment
is more insidious, more subtle,
more insidious.
My resume has all these gaps in
there.
And so I think an employer looks
at that,
and they see, you know, like why
has this
guy not been working?
PAUL SOLMAN: So, the gaps in
your work history,
and the kinds of work you
haven't done, are
kind of signals, you think?
LIAM DOUGHERTY: Definitely.
PAUL SOLMAN: Dougherty, like
Ellis, also found
work here at Liberty.
Bill Krebs says employers have
always underestimated
him because of his intellectual
disability.
BILL KREBS, Liberty Resources:
MDNM /Suffers
From Disability: At one time, it
was the R-word.
We got rid of the R-word.
It means mentally retarded.
So, I was labeled with a mental
retardation.
My I.Q. is mild, so I was I.Q.
of 70.
When you're labeled with a
disability, it's
like Hitler did to the Jews.
They put a tattoo on your arm,
and that stigma
stays with you the rest of your
life.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, once you're
stigmatized,
then?
BILL KREBS: That's it.
PAUL SOLMAN: You're out of the
game?
BILL KREBS: You're out of the
game, no matter
how hard you try.
PAUL SOLMAN: Until he too found
a niche at
Liberty, where disability is a
commonplace.
But what prompted this story is
a second and
more surprising finding of the
Kruse-Ameri
research: Early results show
that when they
sent applications just for jobs
in data entry
and software development...
MASON AMERI: We found no
evidence of discrimination.
PAUL SOLMAN: None?
MASON AMERI: None, at least not
with the preliminary
data.
PAUL SOLMAN: And why might that
be?
We went looking for a case study
in the real
world, and found one in
Philadelphia at an
accounting firm.
STEVE HOWE, EY Americas: We make
a concerted
effort now.
We're going to universities
speaking to the
people responsible for their
students with
disabilities.
PAUL SOLMAN: Steve Howe is
managing partner
for EY Americas, formerly Ernst
& Young.
In a pilot program, it's pushing
to hire more
people with autism, a group that
has had,
up until now, an estimated un-
and under-employment
rate of between 70 and 90
percent.
But, says Sam Briefer:
SAM BRIEFER, EY Americas: We all
bring something
to the table that a lot of
people cannot.
We are very detail-oriented.
We analyze things in a very
specific way.
PAUL SOLMAN: Briefer is one of
four recent
hires here with autism spectrum
disorder.
SAM BRIEFER: There are others
that are very
more detail-oriented than --
than I am and
are much better with numbers.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, it's an
accounting firm.
I guess being good with numbers
is probably
a good thing.
SAM BRIEFER: It is.
It is.
So, it puts us all at a huge
advantage.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, of course,
people on the
spectrum typically have trouble
socializing,
communicating, an obvious
handicap.
Were you nervous about taking
the job?
SAM BRIEFER: I was, yes.
I first thought that I would be
communicating
with a lot of people at once,
which is something
that I always get stressed
about.
But knowing that I'm -- I work
independently
a lot makes me feel a lot better
with where
I work.
PAUL SOLMAN: When things do get
stressful,
EY brings in a job coach to
help.
The team's regular manager,
Jamell Mitchell,
got neurodiversity training
ahead of time,
but he's also learning on the
job.
JAMELL MITCHELL, EY Americas:
They're very
specific and very clear.
As opposed to possibly a
neurotypical person
that may try to slide in at
9:10, the folks
that are on the spectrum will
say, hey, I
arrived at 9:02 today.
Do I need to work until 6:02?
PAUL SOLMAN: And your reaction
to that?
JAMELL MITCHELL: Don't worry
about the two
minutes.
We're OK.
(LAUGHTER)
STAN HWANG, EY Americas: A lot
of people on
the spectrum tend to be, or at
least initially,
more -- more rigid in their --
in some of
their thinking.
PAUL SOLMAN: But says program
participant
Stan Hwang, this form of
rigidity has a major
upside.
STAN HWANG: It also tends to
make them want
to be more honest, I think.
What would be the point of,
like, lying about
something or being deceptive?
PAUL SOLMAN: Because you're more
naturally
just straightforward?
STAN HWANG: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Managing partner
Howe recently
gave the team behind the pilot
program a Better
Begins With You Award.
MAN: Well, thank you very much.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, look, this
isn't about feel-good
inclusivity, so much as boosting
the bottom
line.
Howe hopes to leverage the
special abilities
he's seen in his workers with
autism.
STEVE HOWE: We have learned from
technology
companies like SAP, Microsoft,
HP, who have
hired people with these kind of
skills.
We think it's a rich talent
pool, and we're
going to expand this now from
this exercise
in Philadelphia to three or four
other cities
in the next year, and scale this
up.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that means more
job prospects
for people on the spectrum like
Stan Hwang.
STAN HWANG: No matter what kind
of functionality
a person may be, everyone wants
to be treated
like a human being, and
everybody deserves
an opportunity.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, at long last,
in certain
jobs, they're getting one.
But for those with disabilities
who don't
seem to provide a profit
advantage, many still
seem to be on their own.
AMI PROFETA (through computer):
Employers
do not respond.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics
correspondent
Paul Solman reporting from
Philadelphia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A wonderful
report.
And one more note: Paul's team
reached out
to several major groups
representing employers,
large and small, to hear their
take.
Some didn't respond.
Others said that they will start
to consider
ways of tackling this problem.
Others said that they will start
to consider
ways of tackling this problem.
And we will be back shortly, as
Jeffrey Brown
looks at a novel that might have
been taken
from today's headlines about
living in a city
under siege, finding love, and
perhaps an
escape to a better world.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a most
unusual take on
the refugee experience now and
in the future.
Jeffrey Brown has this latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: An unnamed city
in the Muslim
world is plunged into violence,
and two young
lovers are forced to flee,
becoming a small
part of the mass migrations of
our era.
But they travel through time and
space through
magic doors.
"Exit West" is a novel combining
the very
real with the almost surreal,
imagining individuals
behind today's headlines.
Author Mohsin Hamid has spent
parts of his
life in the U.S. and Europe.
He now lives in his native city
of Lahore,
Pakistan.
And nice to see you again.
MOHSIN HAMID, Author, "Exit
West": Nice to
see you.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is in one
way a very up-to-the-minute
look at the dislocation of
individual lives,
but, of course, it's not
journalism.
It's art.
It's a novel.
Tell me how you thought about
what you were
after.
MOHSIN HAMID: Well, I have been
moving around
my whole life, California,
Pakistan, London,
New York, Pakistan again.
And I wanted to write about the
experience
of migration.
And I also felt this resistance
to migrants
was growing, and I wanted to
write in response
And I also felt this resistance
to migrants
was growing, and I wanted to
write in response
to that.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Saeed and
Nadia, the two
young people in love, they see
their city
fall to pieces.
They -- the violence that we
have all grown
familiar with, I guess, from
newscasts, right,
they're experiencing firsthand.
They leave, but they leave
through these magical
doors.
And it's a little like "The
Chronicle of Narnia,"
right, which I read was one of
your favorites
as a child?
MOHSIN HAMID: That's right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell me about the
doors.
What are they?
MOHSIN HAMID: Well, I think the
doors sort
of already exist.
Distance is collapsing in our
world.
We can travel by stepping into
an airplane,
as I did coming from Pakistan to
America.
We can Skype or go on video
calls with each
other.
And we can open up our phones
and surf the
Internet and be in China or
Antarctica.
And I think, in our world,
distance really
is collapsing.
People are getting pushed
together in new
ways.
And the doors are a slightly
magical way of
capturing that.
JEFFREY BROWN: But there's --
but that's not
what we see in, you know, the
typical migrant
story.
I mean, you're describing a kind
of globalized
world in which you and I might
travel around.
MOHSIN HAMID: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But these people
are refugees.
MOHSIN HAMID: They are.
And I think that it can be a
mistake to focus
too much upon how they move, you
know, crossing
the Rio Grande, or crossing the
Mediterranean
on a small boat.
Those are dramatic stories, but
the bulk of
the migrant or refugee story is,
what made
you want to leave home?
Like, what was so bad that you
left and left
people that you love behind?
And then what happened to you in
the new place?
And those two parts of the story
are the parts
I wanted to focus on.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's interesting
to me, because
you use a kind of magical
realism, but it's
a -- you don't write it as
fantasy.
It's a very unembellished
language.
And it's in the same tone as the
rest of the
story.
So, was it interesting for you,
hard for you
to mix these kind of real and
surreal genres?
MOHSIN HAMID: It wasn't hard.
I sort of believed in the doors
and then...
JEFFREY BROWN: You believed in
them?
MOHSIN HAMID: Yes.
I mean, it...
JEFFREY BROWN: One can just find
a spot in
your city and walk through and
you're in Mykonos,
you're in London, you're in...
MOHSIN HAMID: Yes, well, you
know, I mean,
and, as a writer, what you do
is, you make
up characters that don't exist,
and you believe
in them.
And so the doors are a little
bit like that.
I thought, you know, it often
does feel to
me that the movement between
places is almost
instantaneous.
And you see people popping up in
cities and
you wonder, how is this person
here?
So, the doors are not described
in detail,
but the effect of the doors is
huge, because
millions, billions of people
move.
JEFFREY BROWN: You also wonder
-- I mean,
as you follow them through to
these very real
places, where they meet up with
some kindness
and also some trauma, some
nativist reaction
against the migrants, there's a
kind of meditation
going on about, what is a
nation, who are
people, who's the insider, who's
the outsider.
MOHSIN HAMID: Absolutely.
I think that we're all migrants.
If you lived in the same town
your whole life
and never move and you're 80
years old, that
town has changed completely.
You migrate through time.
Your school has been...
JEFFREY BROWN: Wait a minute.
You think of us -- I mean, even
if you have
never moved, you're a migrant
just because
wherever you are has changed?
MOHSIN HAMID: The novel in a way
is about
how human life in transient.
Stuff changes.
And the attempt to hold onto
things that don't
change, and to pretend they
don't change,
And the attempt to hold onto
things that don't
change, and to pretend they
don't change,
is a mistake, I think.
JEFFREY BROWN: You could have
written much
of what you're telling me
without us seeing
everyday people in boats and
rafts and in
great danger.
everyday people in boats and
rafts and in
great danger.
MOHSIN HAMID: In some ways, it
feels like
world events have taken place
the
MOHSIN HAMID: In some ways, it
feels like
world events have taken place
the
way
that the novel suggested they
might and I
way
that the novel suggested they
might and I
anticipated them.
I didn't really anticipate them.
But when I moved back to
Pakistan, I encountered
so many people who wanted to
leave.
And having just lived in London
and encountered
so much of how people didn't
want people to
come, I felt this tension
between these two
ideas.
And the novel expressed that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, what do you
see happening
today?
Because, I mean, on the one
hand, we're having
a discussion.
You're what we could call a
global citizen.
You and I can get on planes and
we can travel
around to different parts of the
world -- in
some ways, the world much
smaller and open,
but, in many ways, much more
polarized and
some ways, the world much
smaller and open,
but, in many ways, much more
polarized and
closed.
How do you explain it?
MOHSIN HAMID: Well, I think
there's been a
failure of imagination.
Everywhere around the world,
people are having
difficulty imagining a future.
People are going to move.
Things are going to change.
And yet all of our leaders seem
to be telling
us to go back to a previous time
when things
were better.
You know, in Britain, it's go
back before
the E.U.
In America, it's
make America great again.
In
much of Iraq, Iran, Pakistan,
it's, you know,
go back to
much of Iraq, Iran, Pakistan,
it's, you know,
go back to
the caliphate of 1,000 years
ago.
The danger is that we're not
imagining futures,
not imagining something where we
can go to
that's different and
progressive.
And that's, I think, part of the
job of a
novelist, is to start imaging
those futures.
JEFFREY BROWN: Meaning what?
MOHSIN HAMID: Meaning to make
people comfortable
with what I think is the
inevitable reality
of a world where billions of
people are going
to move in the next couple of
hundred years.
You know, climate will change,
sea levels
will rise, people will move.
And if we can't find a way to be
hopeful and
optimistic and find beauty in
that, we're
in real trouble.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
new novel is
"Exit West."
Mohsin Hamid, thank you very
much.
MOHSIN HAMID: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another book I
really want
to read.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.